Kubernetes 1.18 Blog: API Priority and Fairness Alpha (#20090)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2020-04-06-API-Priority-and-Fairness-Alpha.md

In short, it is far too easy for Kubernetes workloads to accidentally DoS the apiservers, causing other important traffic--like system controllers or leader elections---to fail intermittently. In the worst cases, a few broken nodes or controllers can push a busy cluster over the edge, turning a local problem into a control plane outage.

## How do we solve the problem?
The new feature “API Priority and Fairness” is about generalizing the existing max-in-flight request handler in apiserver, to make the behavior more intelligent and configurable. The overall approach is as follows.

1. Each request is matched by a “Flow Schema”. The Flow Schema states the Priority Level for requests that match it, and assigns a “flow identifier” to these requests. Flow identifiers are how the system determines whether requests are from the same source or not.
2. Priority Levels may be configured to behave in several ways. Each Priority Level gets its own isolated concurrency pool.  Priority levels also introduce the concept of queuing requests that cannot be serviced immediately.

> 3. To prevent any one user or namespace from monopolizing a Priority Level, they may be configured to have multiple queues. “Shuffle Sharding” is used to assign each flow of requests to a subset of the queues.

Reviewer: Since this is the first mention of "shuffle sharding", let's move to link to the blog post about it to here.

  * A non-exempt Priority Level may select a number of queues and a "hand size" to use for the shuffle sharding.  [Shuffle sharding](https://aws.amazon.com/builders-library/workload-isolation-using-shuffle-sharding/#What_is_shuffle_sharding.3F) maps flows to queues in a way that is better than consistent hashing.  A given flow has access to a small collection of queues, and for each incoming request the shortest queue is chosen.  When a Priority Level has queues, it also sets a limit on queue length.  There is also a limit placed on how long a request can wait in its queue; this is a fixed fraction of the apiserver's request timeout.  A request that cannot be executed and cannot be queued (any longer) is rejected.
  * Alternatively, a non-exempt Priority Level may select immediate rejection instead of waiting in a queue.
  * See the API Documentation [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.18/#prioritylevelconfiguration-v1alpha1-flowcontrol-apiserver-k8s-io)!

## What’s missing? When will there be a beta?
We’re already planning a few enhancements based on alpha and there will be more as users send feedback to our community. Here’s a list of them:

> * Traffic management for WATCH and LIST requests

Reviewer: Oops, we meant "EXEC" instead of "LIST".
We also have some vague thoughts about LIST requests.  Maybe put an item here saying "Possibly treat LIST requests differently depending on an estimate of how big their result will be"?

---
layout: blog
title: "API Priority and Fairness Alpha"
date: 2020-04-06
slug: kubernetes-1-18-feature-api-priority-and-fairness-alpha
---

**Authors:** Min Kim (Ant Financial), Mike Spreitzer (IBM), Daniel Smith (Google)

This blog describes “API Priority And Fairness”, a new alpha feature in Kubernetes 1.18. API Priority And Fairness permits cluster administrators to divide the concurrency of the control plane into different weighted priority levels. Every request arriving to kube-apiserver will be categorized into one of the priority levels and get its fair share of the control plane’s throughput.

## What problem does this solve?

> Today the apiserver has a simple mechanism for protecting itself against CPU and memory overloads: max-in-flight limits for mutating and for read-only requests. Apart from the distinction between mutating and readonly, no other distinctions are made among requests; consequently, there can be undesirable scenarios where one subset of the requests crowds out other requests.

Reviewer: We probably should take a consistent choice on "readonly" vs "read-only".

Reviewer 2: Maybe also “API server” vs “apiserver”?

Author: I updated to readonly, since that was used more often. apiserver was already in use throughout the document so left it at that.

> In short, it is far too easy for Kubernetes workloads to accidentally DoS the apiservers, causing other important traffic--like system controllers or leader elections---to fail intermittently. In the worst cases, a few broken nodes or controllers can push a busy cluster over the edge, turning a local problem into a control plane outage.

Reviewer: Huh?  I thought two hyphens makes an en-dash and three make an em-dash.  An em-dash is what's appropriate here.

## How do we solve the problem?

> The new feature “API Priority and Fairness” is about generalizing the existing max-in-flight request handler in apiserver, to make the behavior more intelligent and configurable. The overall approach is as follows.

Reviewer: Let's make it plural "apiservers".  Alternatives include making it "each apiserver", or "the apiservers".

> 1. Each request is matched by a “Flow Schema”. The Flow Schema states the Priority Level for requests that match it, and assigns a “flow identifier” to these requests. Flow identifiers are how the system determines whether requests are from the same source or not.

Reviewer 2: how about:
```suggestion
1. Each request is matched by a _Flow Schema_. The Flow Schema states the Priority Level for requests that match it, and assigns a “flow identifier” to these requests. Flow identifiers are how the system determines whether requests are from the same source or not.
```

Reviewer 3: @cnadolny - could we get your help in getting this small nit updated?

2. Priority Levels may be configured to behave in several ways. Each Priority Level gets its own isolated concurrency pool.  Priority levels also introduce the concept of queuing requests that cannot be serviced immediately.
3. To prevent any one user or namespace from monopolizing a Priority Level, they may be configured to have multiple queues. [“Shuffle Sharding”](https://aws.amazon.com/builders-library/workload-isolation-using-shuffle-sharding/#What_is_shuffle_sharding.3F) is used to assign each flow of requests to a subset of the queues.

> 4. Finally, when there is capacity to service a request, a [“Fair Queuing”](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fair_queuing) algorithm is used to select the next request. Within each priority level queues compete with even fairness.

Reviewer: This might flow a little better if we inset the word "the" to make it "Within each priority level the queues compete ..."

Early results have been very promising! Take a look at [this analysis](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/88177#issuecomment-588945806).

## How do I try this out?
You are required to prepare the following things in order to try out the feature:

> 

Reviewer: Yes, this is trying to say the same thing.

  * Each non-exempt Priority Level is configured with a number of "concurrency shares" and gets an isolated pool of concurrency to use.  Requests of that Priority Level run in that pool when it is not full, never anywhere else.  Each apiserver is configured with a total concurrency limit (taken to be the sum of the old limits on mutating and readonly requests), and this is then divided among the Priority Levels in proportion to their concurrency shares.
  * A non-exempt Priority Level may select a number of queues and a "hand size" to use for the shuffle sharding.  Shuffle sharding maps flows to queues in a way that is better than consistent hashing.  A given flow has access to a small collection of queues, and for each incoming request the shortest queue is chosen.  When a Priority Level has queues, it also sets a limit on queue length.  There is also a limit placed on how long a request can wait in its queue; this is a fixed fraction of the apiserver's request timeout.  A request that cannot be executed and cannot be queued (any longer) is rejected.
  * Alternatively, a non-exempt Priority Level may select immediate rejection instead of waiting in a queue.

>   * See the API Documentation [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.18/#prioritylevelconfiguration-v1alpha1-flowcontrol-apiserver-k8s-io)!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * See the [API documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.18/#prioritylevelconfiguration-v1alpha1-flowcontrol-apiserver-k8s-io) for this feature.
```
?

## What’s missing? When will there be a beta?
We’re already planning a few enhancements based on alpha and there will be more as users send feedback to our community. Here’s a list of them:

* Traffic management for WATCH and EXEC requests
* Possibly treat LIST requests differently depending on an estimate of how big their result will be
* Adjusting and improving the default set of FlowSchema/PriorityLevelConfiguration
* Enhancing observability on how this feature works

> * Join the discussion [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1632)

Reviewer: This was not meant to be an item in the list.  It is a call to action regarding the list.

Author: Ah I misunderstood, removed it for now. Where exactly should this go? Before or after the list?

Reviewer: After

## How can I get involved?

> As always! Reach us on slack #sig-api-machinery, or through the [mailing list](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/kubernetes-sig-api-machinery). We have lots of exciting features to build and can use all sorts of help.

Reviewer: Yes, that too.  Specifially, the #sig-api-machinery channel.

**Authors:** Min Kim (Ant Financial), Mike Spreitzer (IBM), Daniel Smith (Google)

> This blog describes “API Priority And Fairness”, a new alpha feature in Kubernetes 1.18. API Priority And Fairness permits cluster administrators to divide the concurrency of the control plane into different weighted priority levels. Every request arriving to kube-apiserver will be categorized into one of the priority levels and get its fair share of the control plane’s throughput.

Reviewer: How about making it ".. arriving at a kube-apiserver ..." ?
